---
title:  "Iliad: War and Honor"
tags: ["books"]
showTags: true
date: 2020-06-22
---
### About the book

* **Author:** Homer
* **Translated by:** Robert Fagles
* **Year of publication:** circa 762 B.C.

### Thoughts

I would never have read this book if not for the DS summer requirement. My experience reading the Odyssey in freshman year was just such a traumatic experience that I never thought I would pick up another work by Homer. But this time, reading the Iliad four years later, I’m starting to understand why it’s considered such a classic in the world of literature. Homer offers no romanticization for the brutality of warfare but instead depicts the gory truth in a powerful and moving manner. Neither does he shy away from describing the anguish that war causes to families and friends--he repeatedly mentions the pain that one’s parents will go through whenever a soldier is slaughtered by another. Homer also expertly utilizes figurative language. His similes are long, often spanning multiple lines, and they are used to emphasize his descriptions of characters or scenes. Most notably, Homer uses animals and wild beasts frequently, especially lions, sometimes to describe the courageous and strong fighters but other times to describe those fleeing in disgrace. Using such descriptive language, Homer creates powerful scenes that moves the audience.

One prominent theme from Iliad is the relationship between the gods and the mortals. It seems to me that although the gods are involved in the Trojan war, they view it as either entertainment or something that would help them achieve their own ends, such as to humiliate another god. There is pity, indeed, for the mortal men, but even as the gods help out those men whom they love, they are still fostering selfish goals. For example, even as Athena helps Diomedes, she tells him to not fight any god except for Aphrodite, who just recently has won against her in the competition for the title of “the fairest.” It would be hard for me to believe that the incentive behind her telling Diomedes is not revenge for losing the competition.

Also, I think the mortals very much depend on the gods for victories and honors. The gods have intervened many times throughout the story to save the soldiers that they love. If not for their intervention, the men would have died at the hands of their enemies, so they need the gods’ favor to survive and win victories. When Apollo urged Aeneas to face Achilles head on, he used the reasoning that Aeneas comes from a superior lineage--the son of Zeus’s daughter--while Achille is born of a lesser goddess (Book 20, page 507). It seems to imply that the power of mortal men is derived from the immortal bloodline that they inherit, or from the favor that they are able to attain from the gods.

At the same time, Homer poses an interesting question for us to ponder: when people believe so strongly in the power of gods to determine one’s fate, what’s the line between making the gods responsible for one’s actions or taking up responsibility himself? Homer offers some insight into this in the passage where Achilles and Agamemnon reconcile with each other: Agamemnon blames the gods for blinding his eyes with anger and snatching his senses away. But should the gods be blamed, or should Agamemnon himself?