---
title:  "Walden: Solitude in Nature"
tags: ["books"]
showTags: true
date: 2020-08-13
---
### About the book

* **Author:** Henry David Thoreau
* **Year of publication:** 1854

### Themes
* Simplicity
* Serenity
* Appreciation of nature

### Chapter: Economy
“Economy” is the first and the longest chapter in this work. In it, Thoreau advocates for simplicity in life, with nothing more than the “necessaries.” To demonstrate the feasibility of such a pursuit, he details his economic decisions in the chapter, illustrating how he can support himself with minimal possessions. However, while this lifestyle is definitely possible for those of his own social class, it is beyond the reach of those struggling with the difficulties of life, a fact that he seems completely ignorant of. To him, who has no real-life concerns about sustenance, this simplistic lifestyle is merely a pastime or an experiment, something that he tries for a few years but jumps out of whenever he desires, but many people do not have the privilege that he so enjoys.

> “Often the poor man is not so cold and hungry as he is dirty and ragged and gross. It is partly his taste, and not merely his misfortune. If you give him money, he will perhaps buy more rags with it.” (69) 

Thoreau seems to believe that the poor have chosen their impoverished and difficult life out of “taste.” He doesn’t recognize that while he has chosen a simplistic life for himself, the poor have no choice.

> “Then I began to pity myself, and I saw that it would be a greater charity to bestow on me a flannel shirt than a whole slop-shop on him.” (70) 

Here, despite the sort of arrogance that Thoreau gives off towards philanthropy, he nonetheless raises an interesting point about how charity does not reflect the poor’s actual needs but instead merely represents what the philanthropists believe to be needed by the poor.

> “I want the flower and fruit of a man; that some fragrance be wafted over from him to me, and some ripeness flavor our intercourse.” (71)

### Chapter: Where I Lived and What I Lived For
One thing that I noted the most in this chapter was Thoreau’s deep passion for life. To him, life is more than just being alive; it is living with a heart full of enthusiasm and energy. He draws a connection between mornings and life: mornings are when one wakes up to life. Many are able to wake up, but only a few are able to be awake enough for “a poetic or divine life” (83). We are all able to live, yet are we truly alive?

> “Morning is when I am awake and there is a dawn in me… To be awake is to be alive.” (83) 

> “I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation, unless it was quite necessary.” (84)

### Chapter: Reading
In this chapter, Thoreau beautifully expresses the long-lasting influence of literature upon anyone who reads and understands. He holds great respect for the wisdoms in literature, and some of his words are still valuable lessons today. However, one thing to note is that he is still speaking from a position of high social standing and thus is prejudiced against anything “less refined.” His reverence towards the classics is impressive, yet there are other sources of great wisdom that are far more accessible to the common population. While he has read extensively, it seems that his definition of literature is confined difficult subjects. Despite this, his comments on education are not only sensible but very much ahead of his time. Indeed, nowadays people often abandon the learning process as soon as they step out of school into society.

> “Books must be read as deliberately and reservedly as they were written.” (94) 

This statement cannot be truer. The best literary works were written in a thoughtful manner, and they deserve to be read and examined in the same fashion.

> “[The spoken language] is commonly transitory, a sound, a tongue, a dialect merely, almost brutish, and we learn it unconsciously, like the brutes, of our mothers. The other is the maturity and experience of that; if that is our mother tongue, this is our father tongue, a reserved and select expression, too significant to be heard by the ear, which we must be born again in order to speak.” (94) 

I have conflicting opinions regarding this passage. I think it is true that literature is how thoughts and emotions are preserved through time, and since writing is often more intentional, literature often contains some of the most refined words in human history. At the same time, however, I find that the spoken language can have a different kind of power. Contrary to written words, the spoken language does not discriminate based on social status, and it reflects the lives of the most common people and the evolution of the lowest communities (which is something that Thoreau neglects repeatedly). I think both written and spoken language are essential in understanding our humanity.
> “A man, any man, will go considerably out of his way to pick up a silver dollar; but here are golden words, which the wisest men of antiquity have uttered, and whose worth the wise of every succeeding age have assured us of; - and yet we learn to read only as far as Easy Reading, the primers and class-books, and when we leave school, the “Little Reading,” and story-books, which are for boys and beginners; and our reading, our conversation and thinking, are all on a very low level, worthy only of pygmies and manikins.” (99) 

Although this passage was written almost two centuries ago, I still feel its truth in today’s world. Nowadays, we enjoy all forms of entertainment that are readily accessible and require no thinking. It seems that our technological developments made no difference on what Thoreau referred to as “Easy Reading,” only that we made it more advanced and more addictive. Society didn’t change either, and the population remains addicted to the same low levels of entertainment and shunning anything more intellectually stimulating.

### Chapter: The Pond in the Winter
> “After a still winter night I awoke with the impression that some question had been put to me, which I had been endeavoring in vain to answer in my sleep, as what—how—when—where? But there was dawning Nature, in whom all creatures live, looking in at my broad windows with serene and satisfied face, and no question on her lips. I awoke to an answered question, to Nature and daylight.” (265)

There are too many questions in life that we are constantly seeking an answer for, although many times our efforts will prove to be futile. But Nature asks no questions. It follows its own rules and creates its own beauty. Thus, Nature is an answered question, with no worry nor concern, and it will leave those who embrace it as serene as itself.

> “I look down into the quiet parlor of the fishes, pervaded by a softened light as through a window of ground glass, with its bright sanded floor the same as in summer; there a perennial waveless serenity reigns as in the amber twilight sky, corresponding to the cool and even temperament of the inhabitants. Heaven is under our feet as well as over our heads.” (266)

Thoreau’s language never fails to portray the sublimity of nature.

> “It is remarkable how long men will believe in the bottomlessness of a pond without takin the trouble to sound it.” (268)

### Chapter: Spring
> “At length the sun’s rays have attained the right angle, and warm winds blow up mist and rain and melt the snowbanks, and the sun, dispersing the mist, smiles on a checked landscape of russet and white smoking with incense, through which the traveler picks his way from islet to islet, cheered by the music of a thousand tinkling rills and rivulets whose veins are filled with the blood of winter which they are bearing off.” (285)

> Many of the phenomena of Winter are suggestive of an inexpressible tenderness and fragile delicacy. We are accustomed to hear this king described as a rude and boisterous tyrant; but with the gentleness of a lover he adorns the tresses of Summer.” (290)

### Thoughts

Although I found some parts of the book to be not too interesting, Thoreau’s heartfelt appreciation of nature, which is so lacking in our world now, nonetheless impressed me. It is obvious that he takes genuine pleasure in being able to embrace nature and its inhabitants in the intimate way that he did, and he treasures this experience with sincere tenderness. On the other hand, Thoreau is so absorbed in his real-life experiment that he downplays the experiences of those who cannot uphold the values that he does. His emphasis on intellectual capabilities and his sometimes-condescending depictions of his uneducated neighbors manifest his ignorance of his own privileges. Meanwhile, he romanticizes the idea of a simple life with nothing more than what is necessary, thus ignoring the obligations and pressures that less fortunate individuals may confront. Overall, this text portrays an intimate relationship with nature and illustrates a new and daring approach to life, although it does speak from a place of high socioeconomic status.