---
title:  "Frankenstein: Destruction in Creation"
tags: ["books"]
showTags: true
date: 2021-07-14
---
### About the book

* **Author:** Mary Shelley
* **Year of publication:** 1818

### Themes
* **The (destructive) power of knowledge**
* **Ambition and desire**
* **Self-destruction in creation**

### Quotes
* *“The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.”* - M. Waldman to Frankenstein (50)

These are some of the words that have drawn Frankenstein into the study of modern science. While they reflect Waldman’s pleasant character, these words also resonate with Frankenstein’s passions and seem to approve of his interest in grand scientific projects and adventures. Considering the later developments of the novel, the irony of these words is clear, and they play a critical role in sealing Frankenstein’s fate. 

* *“No one can conceive the variety of feelings with bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve theirs.”* - Frankenstein (55) 

These words depict a clear picture of Frankenstein’s lofty ambitions as he begins his project. Although some of his words reflect an excited passion in scientific pursuit, others clearly reveal the role that subjective desires play in his career. 

* *“If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind. If this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquility of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Cæsar would have spared his country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.”* - Frankenstein to Robert Walton (56) 

A keyword that Cottom uses in analyzing Frankenstein is “representation.” He/she sees the novel as a discussion of men’s representations of themselves, and the consequences of constructing such representations. In Cottom’s words, “once man creates a representation of himself, that representation takes power over him and he can never get back to a natural state” (Cottom 68). Shelley may have intended the novel as a cautionary tale, but the warning of Frankenstein to Robert Walton is much less convincing. Although he repeatedly warns his friend of the dangers of adventure and exploration, he himself continues to stand by the thirst for lofty glories and the ambition for achievements which have led to his own tortuous experiences. When Walton faces a crisis of mutiny from his crew, Frankenstein’s response is to argue against the sailors and to attempt to excite their courage and fortitude. He has suffered intensely from his lofty pursuit of adventure and honor, yet such pursuits are deeply engrained in his identity, and he is unable to dissociate himself from them even as he faces death. 

* *“Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments out of the room, but I reflected that I ought not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.”* - Frankenstein (175) 

Cottom also speaks of the role of scientific instruments. These instruments are designed to further one’s scientific pursuits, but after being employed in Frankenstein’s creation, they become a source of anguish and revulsion for him. In his eyes, these elements of modern science become a representation not of knowledge but of desire. As Cottom argues, “Science only serves to hide from man the fact that it is himself that he continually rediscovers in nature and in the tools he interposes between himself and nature” (Cottam 65). As a result, the scientific instruments in Frankenstein become a part of the creation, “a complete conflation in the identity of the instruments of creation and the monster himself” (Cottam 65).

### Thoughts
The most central event of the book is the creation of the monster, which stems from Frankenstein’s ambition to consummate his scientific achievements. It is rooted in the series of developments in Frankenstein’s scientific career, which has combined in in him a passion for the chimerical miracles of alchemy as well as a sound knowledge of scientific reality. In him, science becomes an instrument for realizing grand visions, and consequently, the seeming objectivity of scientific knowledge becomes subordinated to his subjective passions and ambitions. Wielding the tool of science, Frankenstein’s project seems to be one of furthering human knowledge and extending human power, but behind the objectivity of such a scientific pursuit, he is in fact seeking to construct a self-representational image and to realize his subjective identity. 

Such subjective identity is a tumultuous one, mirrored by the monstrosity of the creation itself. The project of manipulating life, which involves the manipulation of dead body parts, is a grotesque and profane undertaking, and we must recognize the monstrosity of the man who has pursued such a path. We may argue that Frankenstein has been blinded by the lofty aim of scientific exploration, but to pursue science to such a degree is an act which can only be explained by the psychological distortions of the man himself. His pursuits have stepped beyond the reach of science into the realm of moral ambiguity, and they reflect a deep-rooted desire to project his identity through the means of science. This projection is manifested even before Frankenstein’s scientific pursuits flourishes, when he shuns the study of modern science in favor of the ancient promises of the alchemists, refusing to “exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth” (48). When he is eventually reconciled to modern science, it is driven by these statements, by M. Waldman: “... [the modern scientists] have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature, and show how she works in her hiding-places... They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows” (49). Waldman’s eloquent phrase of “penetrat[ing] into the recesses of nature” is later echoed by Frankenstein himself, as he describes his project of “pursu[ing] nature to her hiding-places" (49, 55). We thus see in Frankenstein a keen interest in grandeur and power of manipulating nature, but is it glory and discovery that awaits him in nature’s hiding-places? 

No indeed. As the creature opens his eyes, Frankenstein is suddenly engulfed by “breathless horror and disgust” at the site of him (58). “How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how to delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form?” he exclaims in agony (58). He has designed the creature to be beautiful, with “hair of a lustrous black” and “teeth of pearly whiteness,” yet when the Sleeping Beauty comes to life, Frankenstein is suddenly confronted with not only the horrendous deformities of his creature but also the grotesque nature of the creation itself. During the project he has been blinded by his passion, driven on by a “resistless...frantic impulse,” but now that he has accomplished the goal, it is as if he has suddenly fallen from a lofty dream into reality (55). The lack of harmony and coherence in the monster’s features is mirrored by Frankenstein’s grand desires, which, extending beyond the limits of human power, disturbs the harmony of the natural world and would destroy the harmony of the creator’s life.  

The horror of the creation also mirrors another aspect of Frankenstein’s identity: his psychological confusion between familial and sexual relations (see Cottom). This is most clearly manifested through the character of Elizabeth. Ever since Elizabeth’s adoption into the Frankenstein household, Frankenstein has determined in his mind that she would be his -- “[his] to protect, love, and cherish” (37). Such a claim of ownership even in his early youth already blurs the boundaries of “sister,” and it infuses a sexual undertone into their relationship which would consummate in their morally questionable marriage bordering on incest. Similarly, before Frankenstein’s mother dies, she asks Elizabeth to take her place with respect to her younger children, also blurring the boundary between “mother” and “sister.” Such confusion of feminine identity plays a key role in shaping Frankenstein’s identity: immediately after the birth of the monster, he dreams of Elizabeth, yet when he embraces her, she turns into the corpse of his dead mother (59). To Frankenstein, the sister, the mother, and the wife are merged into a single feminine figure, which takes on both maternal and sexual roles at once. 

But why does Frankenstein dream of his sister and dead mother as he lies in a frightful state after the birth of the monster? There seems to be a parallel connection between his incestuous and oedipal tendencies—the merging of mother, sister, and wife—and the creation of the monster. The act of creating life is itself a maternal act, yet by infusing the spark of life into the creature with his hands, Frankenstein also takes on the role of the father. Indeed, before his creation comes to life, he has imagined himself as the father of his created species: “No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve theirs” (55). As he, with “profane fingers,” “disturb[s]...the tremendous secrets of the human frame,” the imagery undoubtedly carries a heavy sexual undertone (55). In Sherwin’s words, Frankenstein’s undertaking is a “grotesque act of lovemaking, the son stealing into the womb that bore him in order to implant his seed” (Sherwin 885). It is such incestuous distortions, such blatant transgression of moral boundaries, that gives the creature—as well as the novel—its power to horrify and appall the audience. The creation of the monster can thus be construed as a release of those grotesque desires which are repressed within Frankenstein’s identity, and it even serves as a displacement for those desires and a means for Frankenstein to disclaim those parts of his identity. He rejects his own creation, for to reconcile with it is to confront the chaotic elements within him that have driven him to undertake such a revolting project in the first place. He repeatedly asserts his innocence and dissociates himself from the creature, yet at various moments we are given a glimpse into the hidden workings of his identity. In his delirious speech, he claims responsibility for the monster’s deeds and accuses himself of murdering his friends and family, and even when in a sober state of mind, he describes the creature as “my own spirit let loose from the grave” (78). At these moments, the monstrosity of the creature and the passions of the creator are reconciled into one, two aspects of the same unified identity.

### Further Readings
- [Josh Bernatchez, "Monstrosity, Suffering, Subjectivity, and Sympathetic Community in Frankenstein and 'The Structure of Torture'."](https://www.jstor.org/stable/40649956)
- [Daniel Cottom, "Frankenstein and the Monster of Representation."](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3683905)
- [Paul Sherwin, "Frankenstein: Creation as Catastrophe."](https://www.jstor.org/stable/462130)