---
title:  "Jane Eyre: Between Passion and Reason"
tags: ["books"]
showTags: true
date: 2021-06-26
---
### About the book

* **Author:** Charlotte Bronte
* **Year of publication:** 1847

### Themes
* Independence
* Search for identity
* Quest for love
* Longing for home

### Quotes
> “Do you think I am an automaton? — a machine without feelings? and can bear to have my morsel of bread snatched from my lips, and my drop of living water dashed from my cup? Do you think, because I am poor, obscure, plain, and little, I am soulless and heartless? You think wrong! — I have as much soul as you — and full as much heart! And if God had gifted me with some beauty and much wealth, I should have made it as hard for you to leave me, as it is now for me to leave you. I am not talking to you now through the medium of custom, conventionalities, nor even of mortal flesh: it is my spirit that addresses your spirit; just as if both had passed through the grave, and we stood at God's feet, equal — as we are!”

### Thoughts
Jane Eyre portrays the protagonist’s coming of age and follows her search for love and for a home. From Gateshead, to Lowood, to Thornfield, Jane seeks to find a place for herself which she could call home. At Gateshead, the Reeds family has given her nothing like familial affections. At Lowood, although Jane finds herself at home for some time, the departure of Ms. Temple makes her realize that she cannot rely on one person’s benevolence to fulfill her own desires in life. She advertises, and finds herself a governess’s position at Thornfield. The name of this estate seems to speak for the mystery and troubles of the master, Mr. Rochester. Jane finds herself in love with him, and he with her, but at the altar, she is brought to the fateful discovery that Mr. Rochester already has a wife. Jane’s quest for a home becomes thwarted again, and unwilling to sacrifice her morals and become Mr. Rochester’s mistress, Jane leaves Thornfield behind. Her encounter with the Rivers siblings allows her to feel the warmth of a family, and the news of her inheritance finally allows her to achieve the independence she has always desired. She has found herself a place in the world, with autonomy and self-respect, and eventually, she returns to Mr. Rochester, but no longer as a dependent but someone whom Mr. Rochester would have to depend on.

Jane’s strong will is a major driving force of the story. Whenever Jane seems to have found herself a comfortable place, her restless spirit and firm character always carries her away. This is most clearly illustrated by her departure from Thornfield and from Moor House. After discovering Mr. Rochester’s secret marriage, Jane’s strong sense of morality and self-respect forbids her from remaining near him. She leaves, with no money and no connections in the world, and almost dies in this process. Her rescue by the Rivers and their kindness to her brings her a new family, yet she still refuses to marry St. John Rivers. St. John is a respectable and honorable man, but he is the opposite of Mr. Rochester: while Mr. Rochester is passionate, St. John is austere and severe. He does not love Jane but rather sees a good missionary’s wife in her. Jane knows that she cannot be happy with him and turns him down accordingly; she wants dignity and morality in her marriage, which is why she has left Mr. Rochester, but at the same time, she cannot stand a loveless marriage. Despite the continuous struggles of her life, Jane remains firm in her pursuits and refuses to sacrifice her own goals in life.

The ending of the novel is a little confusing. It seems rather too good, too perfect for Jane. She achieves all her goals in life: she gains independence through a large inheritance, she finds blood relations for herself, and she marries Mr. Rochester, in exactly the form she wants—Mr. Rochester, a single man no longer haunted by his previous wife, and Jane, a financially independent woman whom Mr. Rochester must now depend on. The catastrophe of Thornfield, the disability of Mr. Rochester, and the supernatural connection between Jane and Mr. Rochester which has called her to search for him are clear Gothic elements, yet somehow from these dark developments emerge a happy ending. For sure the ending is the culmination of Jane’s quest for love and belonging, but when the fulfillment of these goals emerges from the themes of trouble and disaster, it seems unfitting for the novel as a whole.

As for the feminism in the novel, there are clear indications of Jane’s rebellion against the expectations of womanhood: she refuses to marry if it would compromise her character or her happiness, she seeks after independent livelihood for herself, and portrayed as a plain, weak woman, she nonetheless exhibits passion, intelligence, and a strong will. At the same time, however, the character of Bertha Mason, Mr. Rochester’s lunatic wife, seems to undermine the feminist rebellion of the novel. Bronte seems to approve of Mr. Rochester’s complete disownment of Bertha and his wish of securing a second wife, even though he is essentially failing to take responsibility for his own mistake in the past. Meanwhile, another question arises: is Bertha truly mad? All the descriptions of her come from either Mr. Rochester or Jane Eyre, both of whom are biased against her. The readers have no way of ascertaining her true state of mind, and we also have no insight into her inner world. Is she mad, or is she driven mad by years of incarceration? After setting fire to Thornfield for the last time, she climbs onto the roof, declaring her identity for the world to see, and jumps off, emancipating herself in this way. Is she as demonic as she is described, or is she just another victim to marriage? Many questions remain open-ended, and they seem to cast some doubt on the message of female independence that Bronte seeks to convey.

